---
layout: post
title:  "Proof with Bayes"
date:   2018-10-12 18:04:07 +0900
categories: jekyll update
comments: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

<!--more-->

<script src="https://d3js.org/d3.v5.min.js" charset="utf-8"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" async src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_SVG"></script>
<script src="https://cdn.plot.ly/plotly-latest.min.js"></script>

What is a proof?
You want to check if a statement is true.

Example: Proof of Pythagoras' theorem.


We want to check that 

$$ c = \sqrt{a^2 + b^2} $$

is true for any right triangle with hypotenuse \\(c\\) and catheti \\(a\\) and \\(b\\).

We can formulate this in the language of probability theory.

We want to check that

$$ p(c|a,b,\perp) = \delta\left(c - \sqrt{a^2 + b^2}\right) $$


$$ p(\perp|A,B,C) = \left[(B-C)^T(A-C)==0\right] = \left[\begin{pmatrix} B_x - C_x \\ B_y - C_y  \end{pmatrix}^T\begin{pmatrix} A_x - C_x \\ A_y - C_y  \end{pmatrix}==0\right]  $$

$$ p(\perp|A,B,C) =  \left[(B_x - C_x)(A_x - C_x) + (B_y - C_y)(A_y - C_y)==0\right]  $$

$$ p(a|A,B,C) = p(a|B,C) = \delta\left(a - \sqrt{(B_x - C_x)^2 + (B_y - C_y)^2}\right) $$

$$ p(b|A,B,C) = p(b|A,C) = \delta\left(b - \sqrt{(A_x - C_x)^2 + (A_y - C_y)^2}\right) $$

$$ p(c|A,B,C) = p(c|A,B) = \delta\left(c - \sqrt{(A_x - B_x)^2 + (A_y - B_y)^2}\right) $$



Ok let's start with a uniform prior 

$$ p(A,B,C), $$

we want to check it for any set of points.

We assume, that we take a measurement of \\(a\\). We update our prior with Bayes to obtain the posterior

$$ p(A,B,C|a) = \frac{p(a|B,C)p(A,B,C)}{p(a)}. $$

Mentally we are left only with those points \\(A\\), \\(B\\), \\(C\\) that satisfy the constraint.

This is like a tube in 6 dimensional space. (Or not!)

We now measure \\(b\\) and update our current belief \\(p(A,B,C\|a)\\)

$$ p(A,B,C|a,b) = \frac{p(b|A,C)p(A,B,C|a)}{p(b|a)}. $$

As a last step we _observe_ that we have orthogonality. We are not really observing it, but we want to restrict us to worlds with orthogonality. We know there is orthogonality.

$$ p(A,B,C|a,b,\perp) = \frac{p(\perp|A,B,C)p(A,B,C|a,b)}{p(\perp|a,b)}. $$


Great! We now have an expression that has all the information of our assumptions.

The only thing that we have to do is to check if our condition holds for any of these remaining points \\(A\\), \\(B\\) and \\(C\\).

We marginalize over every possible point

$$ p(c|a,b,\perp) = \int_{A,B,C} p(c|A,B) p(A,B,C|a,b,\perp) \,dA\,dB\,dC$$


Now we simply have to check if

$$ p(c|a,b,\perp) = \delta\left(c - \sqrt{a^2 + b^2}\right) $$

holds.

Theoretically, you could do this simply by _looking_.

But this is not practical. Therefore, we try to find analytic expressions for the steps in the middle.


How does 

$$ p(\perp|A,B,C) = \left[(B-C)^T(A-C)==0\right] = \left[\begin{pmatrix} B_x - C_x \\ B_y - C_y  \end{pmatrix}^T\begin{pmatrix} A_x - C_x \\ A_y - C_y  \end{pmatrix}==0\right]  $$

look like?

It is a six dimensional manifold in seven dimensional space.

How can we check, if a line is orthogonal to a plane?

$$ p(A,B|plane) $$

$$ p(C|line) $$

$$ p(\perp|plane, line) = \int_{A,B,C} p(\perp|A,B,C) p(A,B|plane)p(C|line)  \,dA\,dB\,dC $$







