---
layout: post
title:  "Fourier and Nyquist–Shannon sampling theorem"
date:   2018-10-12 18:04:07 +0900
categories: jekyll update
comments: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

<!--more-->
<script src="https://d3js.org/d3.v5.min.js" charset="utf-8"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" async src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_SVG"></script>
<script src="https://cdn.plot.ly/plotly-latest.min.js"></script> 


Let's assume you have a signal \\(f(t)\\). You want to infer the spectrum of this signal.

If you are given sample after time \\(T_s\\) has passed you can reconstruct the true spectrum if the higheest frequency in the signal is \\(\frac{1}{2T_s}\\).


With Bayes you can also infer possible spectra given arbitrary samples.

$$ p(Spectrum|sample_1,..., sample_N) $$

But how?

The true spectrum is defined as 

$$ (\mathcal{F}f)(\omega) $$

How can you get the value of the corresponding at time T?

You have to perform the inverse Fourier transform and evaluate at time T

$$ y(T) = \int_t (\mathcal{F^{-1}}F)(t)\delta(t-T) \,dt $$

If you know obtain a sample \\(y(T)\\) you can update your prior that is in the beginning the whole function space.

By updating your prior you will cut away all possible spectra that are not compatible with your findings.

If you have now evenly spaced samples with the condition from above, only one function remains. The correct spectrum. 

If you have higher frequencies in your signals, there are infinitely many functions remaining.

The condition that there a no higher frequencies is also cutting your space, that there are effectively no ambiguities.

It is also possible, that you have samples with noise. In this case, the cutting that you perform in function space is smooth. You will have a distribution over functions.

Is there something like a Delta dirac function in function space?

$$ \int_{f \in Function space} \delta(f - g) \,df $$





Another way to think about it

You want to infer the function given samples.
Every sample is cutting parts of the function space.

If you know have conditions on your function (for example smoothness or lipschitz or function type) this will already cut away some functions.

If now a sample is given it will cut more away than before, because it will also restrict the neighbouring points.

One particular example are polynomials. You assume, that your function is \\(n\\)th-order polynomial. For every sample you will cut away functions from your space. If you have the \\(n\\)-th sample, there is only one sample remaining.

If your samples are noisy, you will also make a noisy cut. You will need more samples.

But actually, if you already restrict your space as \\(n\\)th-order polynomial you can express every point (function) in this space by \\(n\\) numbers uniquely.

I guess, that after the first point is given your manifold will lose a dimension. You only need \\(n-1\\) to describe the remaining space.

Instead of using with the space itself, you can use the parameters itself. And also have distribution over these functions, if your samples are noisy.



Can you Fourier transform several functions at once?







